Add k-NN radial search doc (#7050)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/knn/radial-search-knn.md

---
layout: default
title: k-NN radial search
nav_order: 28
parent: k-NN search
grand_parent: Search methods
has_children: false
has_math: true
---

# k-NN radial search

Radial search enhances the k-NN plugin's capabilities beyond mere approximate top-k searches. It empowers users to search all points within a vector space that reside within a specified max distance/min score threshold from a query point. This provides increased flexibility and utility in search operations.

## Parameter type

`max_distance` allows users to specify a physical distance within the vector space, identifying all points that are within this distance from the query point. This approach is particularly useful for applications requiring spatial proximity or absolute distance measurements.

`min_score` enables the specification of a similarity score, facilitating the retrieval of points that meet or exceed this score in relation to the query point. This method is ideal for scenarios where relative similarity, based on a specific metric, is more critical than physical proximity.

> Note: Only exactly one of `k`, `max_distance`, `min_score` is required to be specified during the approximate search. For more information about the vector spaces, see [Spaces](#spaces).

Author: Similar with above comment, we might want say:

Only exactly one query variable, either `k`, `max_distance` or `min_score`, is required to be specified during the approximate search.

## Supported cases

> You can perform radial search with Lucene or Faiss engines. The following table summarizes the radial search use cases by engines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can perform radial search with either the Lucene or Faiss engines. The following table summarizes the radial search use cases by engines.
```

| Engine supported  | Filter supported  | Nested field supported | Search type  |
|------------------|------------------|------------------------|----------------|
| Lucene           | true             | false                  | approximate    |
| Faiss            | true             | true                   | approximate    |

## Spaces

> A space corresponds to the function used to measure the distance between two points in order to determine the k-nearest neighbors. From the k-NN perspective, a lower score equates to a closer and better result. This is the opposite of how OpenSearch scores results, where a greater score equates to a better result. To convert distances to OpenSearch scores, we take 1 / (1 + distance). The k-NN plugin supports the following spaces. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A space corresponds to the function used to measure the distance between two points in order to determine the k-nearest neighbors. When using k-NN, a lower score equates to a closer and better result. This is the opposite of how OpenSearch scores results, where a greater score equates to a better result. To convert distances to OpenSearch scores, radial search uses the following formula, 1 / (1 + distance). The k-NN plugin supports the following spaces. 
```

Not every method supports each of these spaces. Be sure to check out [the method documentation]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#method-definitions) to make sure the space you are interested in is supported.
{: note.}

<table>
  <thead style="text-align: center">
  <tr>
    <th>Space type</th>
    <th>Distance function (d)</th>
    <th>OpenSearch score</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tr>
    <td>l1</td>
    <td>\[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = \sum_{i=1}^n |x_i - y_i| \]</td>
    <td>\[ score = {1 \over 1 + d } \]</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>l2</td>
    <td>\[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = \sum_{i=1}^n (x_i - y_i)^2 \]</td>
    <td>\[ score = {1 \over 1 + d } \]</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>

>     <td>linf</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td><c>linf</c></td>
```

    <td>\[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = max(|x_i - y_i|) \]</td>
    <td>\[ score = {1 \over 1 + d } \]</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>cosinesimil</td>
    <td>\[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = 1 - cos { \theta } = 1 - {\mathbf{x} &middot; \mathbf{y} \over \|\mathbf{x}\| &middot; \|\mathbf{y}\|}\]\[ = 1 - 
    {\sum_{i=1}^n x_i y_i \over \sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^n x_i^2} &middot; \sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^n y_i^2}}\]
    where \(\|\mathbf{x}\|\) and \(\|\mathbf{y}\|\) represent the norms of vectors x and y respectively.</td>

>     <td><b>nmslib</b> and <b>faiss:</b>\[ score = {1 \over 1 + d } \]<br><b>Lucene:</b>\[ score = {2 - d \over 2}\]</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td><b>nmslib</b> and <b>Faiss:</b>\[ score = {1 \over 1 + d } \]<br><b>Lucene:</b>\[ score = {2 - d \over 2}\]</td>
```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>innerproduct (supported for Lucene in OpenSearch version 2.13 and later)</td>
    <td>\[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = - {\mathbf{x} &middot; \mathbf{y}} = - \sum_{i=1}^n x_i y_i \] 
        <br><b>Lucene:</b>
        \[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = {\mathbf{x} &middot; \mathbf{y}} = \sum_{i=1}^n x_i y_i \]
    </td>
    <td>\[ \text{If} d \ge 0, \] \[score = {1 \over 1 + d }\] \[\text{If} d < 0, score = &minus;d + 1\]
        <br><b>Lucene:</b>
        \[ \text{If} d > 0, score = d + 1 \] \[\text{If} d \le 0\] \[score = {1 \over 1 + (-1 &middot; d) }\]
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

The cosine similarity formula does not include the `1 -` prefix. However, because similarity search libraries equates

> smaller scores with closer results, they return `1 - cosineSimilarity` for cosine similarity space---that's why `1 -` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
smaller scores with closer results, they return `1 - cosineSimilarity` for the cosine similarity space. This is why `1 -` is
```

included in the distance function.
{: .note }

With cosine similarity, it is not valid to pass a zero vector (`[0, 0, ...]`) as input. This is because the magnitude of
such a vector is 0, which raises a `divide by 0` exception in the corresponding formula. Requests
containing the zero vector will be rejected and a corresponding exception will be thrown.
{: .note }

## Get started to use radial search

> In the following section, we provide a detailed example illustrating how to utilize radial search.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following section provides detailed examples of how to use radial search.
```

### Create index

> To use k-NN index with radial search, you must create a k-NN index by setting `index.knn` to `true`. Specify one or more fields of the `knn_vector` data type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use k-NN index with radial search, create a k-NN index by setting `index.knn` to `true`. Specify one or more fields of the `knn_vector` data type, as shown in the following example:
```

```json
PUT knn-index-test
{
  "settings": {
    "number_of_shards": 1,
    "number_of_replicas": 1,
    "index.knn": true
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 2,
        "method": {
            "name": "hnsw",
            "space_type": "l2",
            "engine": "faiss",
            "parameters": {
              "ef_construction": 100,
              "m": 16,
              "ef_search": 100
            }
          }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Ingest data

> After you create the index, add some data to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you create the index, add some data similar to the following:
```

```json
PUT _bulk?refresh=true
{"index": {"_index": "knn-index-test", "_id": "1"}}
{"my_vector": [7.0, 8.2], "price": 4.4}
{"index": {"_index": "knn-index-test", "_id": "2"}}
{"my_vector": [7.1, 7.4], "price": 14.2}
{"index": {"_index": "knn-index-test", "_id": "3"}}
{"my_vector": [7.3, 8.3], "price": 19.1}
{"index": {"_index": "knn-index-test", "_id": "4"}}
{"my_vector": [6.5, 8.8], "price": 1.2}
{"index": {"_index": "knn-index-test", "_id": "5"}}
{"my_vector": [5.7, 7.9], "price": 16.5}

```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Perform radial search with `max_distance`

> 

Reviewer: The following example shows a radial search performed with `max_distance`:

```json
GET knn-index-test/_search
{
    "query": {
        "knn": {
            "my_vector": {
                "vector": [
                    7.1,
                    8.3
                ],
                "max_distance": 2
            }
        }
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> All documents that fall within the squared Euclidean distance (`l2^2`) of 2 are returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All documents that fall within the squared Euclidean distance (`l2^2`) of 2 are returned, as shown in the following response:
```

                        7.0,
                        8.2
                    ],
                    "price": 4.4
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "3",
                "_score": 0.9615384,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.3,
                        8.3
                    ],
                    "price": 19.1
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "4",
                "_score": 0.62111807,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        6.5,
                        8.8
                    ],
                    "price": 1.2
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "2",
                "_score": 0.5524861,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.1,
                        7.4
                    ],
                    "price": 14.2
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```
</details>

> ### Perform radial search with `max_distance` and filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perform radial search with `max_distance` and filter

The following example shows a radial search performed with `max_distance` and a response filter:

```

```json
GET knn-index-test/_search
{
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector": {
        "vector": [7.1, 8.3],
        "max_distance": 2,
        "filter": {
          "range": {
            "price": {
              "gte": 1,
              "lte": 5
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> All documents that fall within the squared Euclidean distance (`l2^2`) of 6 and have price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All documents that fall within the squared Euclidean distance (`l2^2`) of 6 and have price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned, as shown in the following response:
```

<details markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Results
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta}

```json
{
    "took": 4,
    "timed_out": false,
    "_shards": {
        "total": 1,
        "successful": 1,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
    },
    "hits": {
        "total": {
            "value": 2,
            "relation": "eq"
        },
        "max_score": 0.98039204,
        "hits": [
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "1",
                "_score": 0.98039204,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.0,
                        8.2
                    ],
                    "price": 4.4
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "4",
                "_score": 0.62111807,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        6.5,
                        8.8
                    ],
                    "price": 1.2
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```
</details>

> ### Perform radial search with `min_score`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perform radial search with `min_score`

The following example shows a radial search with `min_score`:
```

```json
GET knn-index-test/_search
{
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector": {
        "vector": [7.1, 8.3],
        "min_score": 0.95
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> All documents with a score of 0.9 or higher are returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All documents with a score of 0.9 or higher are returned, as shown in the following response:
```

<details markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Results
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta}

```json
{
    "took": 3,
    "timed_out": false,
    "_shards": {
        "total": 1,
        "successful": 1,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
    },
    "hits": {
        "total": {
            "value": 2,
            "relation": "eq"
        },
        "max_score": 0.98039204,
        "hits": [
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "1",
                "_score": 0.98039204,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.0,
                        8.2
                    ],
                    "price": 4.4
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "3",
                "_score": 0.9615384,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.3,
                        8.3
                    ],
                    "price": 19.1
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```
</details>

> ### Perform radial search with `min_score` and filter

Reviewer: Th
```suggestion
### Perform radial search with `min_score` and filter

The following example shows a radial search with `min_score` and a response filter:

```

```json
GET knn-index-test/_search
{
    "query": {
        "knn": {
            "my_vector": {
                "vector": [
                    7.1,
                    8.3
                ],
                "min_score": 0.95,
                "filter": {
                    "range": {
                        "price": {
                            "gte": 1,
                            "lte": 5
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> All documents with a score of 0.9 or higher and have price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All documents with a score of 0.9 or higher and have price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned, as shown in the following example:
```

---
layout: default
title: Radial search
nav_order: 28
parent: k-NN search
grand_parent: Search methods
has_children: false
has_math: true
---

# Radial search

Radial search enhances the k-NN plugin's capabilities beyond approximate top-`k` searches. With radial search, you can search all points within a vector space that reside within a specified maximum distance or minimum score threshold from a query point. This provides increased flexibility and utility in search operations.

## Parameter type

`max_distance` allows users to specify a physical distance within the vector space, identifying all points that are within this distance from the query point. This approach is particularly useful for applications requiring spatial proximity or absolute distance measurements.

> `min_score` enables the specification of a similarity score, facilitating the retrieval of points that meet or exceed this score in relation to the query point. This method is ideal for scenarios where relative similarity, based on a specific metric, is more critical than physical proximity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`min_score` enables the specification of a similarity score, facilitating the retrieval of points that meet or exceed this score in relation to the query point. This method is ideal in scenarios where relative similarity, based on a specific metric, is more critical than physical proximity.
```

Only one query variable, either `k`, `max_distance`, or `min_score`, is required to be specified during radial search. For more information about the vector spaces, see [Spaces](#spaces).

## Supported cases

> You can perform radial search with either the Lucene or Faiss engines. The following table summarizes the radial search use cases by engines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can perform radial search with either the Lucene or Faiss engines. The following table summarizes radial search use cases by engine.
```

| Engine supported  | Filter supported  | Nested field supported | Search type  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Lucene           | true             | false                  | approximate    |
| Faiss            | true             | true                   | approximate    |

## Spaces

> A space corresponds to the function used to measure the distance between two points in order to determine the k-nearest neighbors. When using k-NN, a lower score equates to a closer and better result. This is the opposite of how OpenSearch scores results, where a greater score equates to a better result. To convert distances to OpenSearch scores, radial search uses the following formula, 1 / (1 + distance). The k-NN plugin supports the following spaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A space corresponds to the function used to measure the distance between two points in order to determine the k-nearest neighbors. When using k-NN, a lower score equates to a closer and better result. This is the opposite of how OpenSearch scores results, where a greater score equates to a better result. To convert distances to OpenSearch scores, radial search uses the following formula: 1 / (1 + distance). The k-NN plugin supports the following spaces.
```

> Not every method supports each of these spaces. Be sure to check out [the method documentation]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#method-definitions) to make sure the space you are interested in is supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Not every method supports each of these spaces. Be sure to refer to [the method documentation]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#method-definitions) to verify that the space you want to use is supported.
```

    <td>\[ score = {1 \over 1 + d } \]</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>cosinesimil</td>
    <td>\[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = 1 - cos { \theta } = 1 - {\mathbf{x} &middot; \mathbf{y} \over \|\mathbf{x}\| &middot; \|\mathbf{y}\|}\]\[ = 1 - 
    {\sum_{i=1}^n x_i y_i \over \sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^n x_i^2} &middot; \sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^n y_i^2}}\]
    where \(\|\mathbf{x}\|\) and \(\|\mathbf{y}\|\) represent the norms of vectors x and y respectively.</td>
    <td><b>nmslib</b> and <b>Faiss:</b>\[ score = {1 \over 1 + d } \]<br><b>Lucene:</b>\[ score = {2 - d \over 2}\]</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>innerproduct (supported for Lucene in OpenSearch version 2.13 and later)</td>
    <td>\[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = - {\mathbf{x} &middot; \mathbf{y}} = - \sum_{i=1}^n x_i y_i \] 
        <br><b>Lucene:</b>
        \[ d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = {\mathbf{x} &middot; \mathbf{y}} = \sum_{i=1}^n x_i y_i \]
    </td>
    <td>\[ \text{If} d \ge 0, \] \[score = {1 \over 1 + d }\] \[\text{If} d < 0, score = &minus;d + 1\]
        <br><b>Lucene:</b>
        \[ \text{If} d > 0, score = d + 1 \] \[\text{If} d \le 0\] \[score = {1 \over 1 + (-1 &middot; d) }\]
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

> The cosine similarity formula does not include the `1 -` prefix. However, because similarity search libraries equates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cosine similarity formula does not include the `1 -` prefix. However, because similarity search libraries equate
```

> smaller scores with closer results, they return `1 - cosineSimilarity` for the cosine similarity space. This is why `1 -` is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
lower scores with closer results, they return `1 - cosineSimilarity` for the cosine similarity space. This is why `1 -` is
```

included in the distance function.
{: .note }

With cosine similarity, it is not valid to pass a zero vector (`[0, 0, ...]`) as an input. This is because the magnitude of
such a vector is 0, which raises a `divide by 0` exception in the corresponding formula. Requests

> containing the zero vector will be rejected and a corresponding exception will be thrown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
containing a zero vector will be rejected, and a corresponding exception will be thrown.
```

{: .note }

## Examples

> The following examples can help you get started with radial search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following examples can help you to get started with radial search.
```

### Prerequisites

> To use k-NN index with radial search, create a k-NN index by setting `index.knn` to `true`. Specify one or more fields of the `knn_vector` data type, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use a k-NN index with radial search, create a k-NN index by setting `index.knn` to `true`. Specify one or more fields of the `knn_vector` data type, as shown in the following example:
```

                        7.0,
                        8.2
                    ],
                    "price": 4.4
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "3",
                "_score": 0.9615384,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.3,
                        8.3
                    ],
                    "price": 19.1
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "4",
                "_score": 0.62111807,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        6.5,
                        8.8
                    ],
                    "price": 1.2
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "2",
                "_score": 0.5524861,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.1,
                        7.4
                    ],
                    "price": 14.2
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```
</details>

> ### Example: Radial search with `max_distance` and filter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Example: Radial search with `max_distance` and a filter
```

The following example shows a radial search performed with `max_distance` and a response filter:

```json
GET knn-index-test/_search
{
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector": {
        "vector": [7.1, 8.3],
        "max_distance": 2,
        "filter": {
          "range": {
            "price": {
              "gte": 1,
              "lte": 5
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> All documents that fall within the squared Euclidean distance (`l2^2`) of 2 and have price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned, as shown in the following response:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All documents that fall within the squared Euclidean distance (`l2^2`) of 2 and have a price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned, as shown in the following response:
```

All documents with a score of 0.9 or higher are returned, as shown in the following response:

<details markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Results
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta}

```json
{
    "took": 3,
    "timed_out": false,
    "_shards": {
        "total": 1,
        "successful": 1,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
    },
    "hits": {
        "total": {
            "value": 2,
            "relation": "eq"
        },
        "max_score": 0.98039204,
        "hits": [
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "1",
                "_score": 0.98039204,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.0,
                        8.2
                    ],
                    "price": 4.4
                }
            },
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "3",
                "_score": 0.9615384,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.3,
                        8.3
                    ],
                    "price": 19.1
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```
</details>

> ### Example: Radial search with `min_score` and filter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Example: Radial search with `min_score` and a filter
```

The following example shows a radial search performed with `min_score` and a response filter:

```json
GET knn-index-test/_search
{
    "query": {
        "knn": {
            "my_vector": {
                "vector": [
                    7.1,
                    8.3
                ],
                "min_score": 0.95,
                "filter": {
                    "range": {
                        "price": {
                            "gte": 1,
                            "lte": 5
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> All documents with a score of 0.9 or higher and have price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All documents that have a score of 0.9 or higher and a price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned, as shown in the following example:
```

                    "range": {
                        "price": {
                            "gte": 1,
                            "lte": 5
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

All documents with a score of 0.9 or higher and have price within the range of 1 to 5 are returned:

<details markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Results
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta}

```json
{
    "took": 4,
    "timed_out": false,
    "_shards": {
        "total": 1,
        "successful": 1,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
    },
    "hits": {
        "total": {
            "value": 1,
            "relation": "eq"
        },
        "max_score": 0.98039204,
        "hits": [
            {
                "_index": "knn-index-test",
                "_id": "1",
                "_score": 0.98039204,
                "_source": {
                    "my_vector": [
                        7.0,
                        8.2
                    ],
                    "price": 4.4
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```
</details>

## Utilize k-NN radial search during neural search

> To utilize radial search during a neural search, you can use the `max_distance` or `min_score` parameters, In this example, the neural search set up come from [Neural search tutorial]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/neural-search-tutorial/)

Reviewer 3: All neural search example should be separate from K-NN examples.
